♪♪(horn playing)♪♪
President Obama:
I like this.
♪♪(horn playing)♪♪
President Obama:
Thank you.
(cheering and applause)
I think Congress needs
one of those horns.
(laughter)
That sounds pretty good.
Sounds like Louis
Armstrong back there.
(laughter)
Good afternoon, everybody.
It is a great honor
for me to be in Accra,
and to speak to the
representatives of the people of Ghana.
(cheering and applause)
I am deeply grateful for the
welcome that I've received,
as are Michelle and
Malia, and Sasha Obama.
Ghana's history is rich, the
ties between our two countries
are strong, and I am proud
that this is my first visit to
sub-Saharan Africa as President
of the United States of America.
(cheering and applause)
I want to thank Madam Speaker
and all the members of the
House of Representatives
for hosting us today.
I want to thank President Mills
for his outstanding leadership.
To the former Presidents --
Jerry Rawlings,
former President Kufuor;
Vice President; Chief Justice;
thanks to all of you for your
extraordinary hospitality and
the wonderful institutions
that you've built here in Ghana.
Now, I'm speaking to you
at the end of a long trip.
I began in Russia, for a Summit
between two great powers.
I traveled to Italy, for a
meeting of the world's leading economies.
And I've come here, to
Ghana, for a simple reason:
the 21st century will be shaped by
what happens not just in Rome
or Moscow or Washington, but by
what happens in Accra as well.
(cheering and applause)
This is the simple truth of a
time when the boundaries between
people are overwhelmed
by our connections.
Your prosperity can expand
America's prosperity.
Your health and security can
contribute to the world's health
and security.
And the strength of your
democracy can help advance human
rights for people everywhere.
So I do not see the countries
and peoples of Africa as a world
apart; I see Africa as a
fundamental part of our
interconnected world --
as partners with America on behalf
of the future we want
for all of our children.
That partnership must
be grounded in mutual
responsibility and
mutual respect,
and that is what I want to
speak with you about today.
We must start from the simple
premise that Africa's future is
up to Africans.
I say this knowing full well the
tragic past that has sometimes
haunted this part of the world.
After all, I have the blood
of Africa within me --
(cheering and applause)
-- and my family's own story
encompasses both the tragedies
and triumphs of the
larger African story.
Some of you know, my grandfather
was a cook for the British in
Kenya, and though he was a
respected elder in his village,
his employers called him
"boy" for much of his life.
He was on the periphery of
Kenya's liberation struggles,
but he was still imprisoned
briefly during repressive times.
In his life, colonialism wasn't
simply the creation of unnatural
borders or unfair
terms of trade --
it was something experienced
personally, day after day,
year after year.
My father grew up herding
goats in a tiny village,
an impossible distance away from
the American universities where
he would come to
get an education.
He came of age at a moment
of extraordinary promise for Africa.
The struggles of his own
father's generation were giving
birth to new nations,
beginning right here in Ghana.
(cheering and applause)
Africans were educating and
asserting themselves in new ways
and history was on the move.
But despite the progress
that has been made --
and there has been considerable
progress in many parts of Africa
-- we also know that much of
that promise has yet to be fulfilled.
Countries like Kenya had a
per capita economy larger than
South Korea's when I was born.
They have badly been outpaced.
Disease and conflict have
ravaged parts of the African continent.
In many places, the hope of my
father's generation gave way to
cynicism, even despair.
Now, it's easy to point fingers,
and to pin the blame of these
problems on others.
Yes, a colonial map that made
little sense helped to breed
conflict; the West has often
approached Africa as a patron
or a source of resources,
rather than a partner.
But the West is not responsible
for the destruction of the
Zimbabwean economy
over the last decade,
or wars in which children
are enlisted as combatants.
In my father's life, it was
partly tribalism and patronage
and nepotism in an independent
Kenya that for a long stretch,
derailed his career, and we know
that this kind of corruption is
still a daily fact of
life for far too many.
Now, we know that's
also not the whole story.
Here in Ghana, you show us a
face of Africa that is too often
overlooked by a world that
sees only tragedy or a need for charity.
The people of Ghana have worked
hard to put democracy on a
firmer footing, with repeated
peaceful transfers of power even
in the wake of closely
contested elections.
(cheering and applause)
And by the way, can I say that for that,
the minority deserves
as much credit as the majority.
(cheering and applause)
And with improved governance
and an emerging civil society,
Ghana's economy has shown
impressive rates of growth.
(cheering)
This progress may lack the drama
of 20th century liberation
struggles, but make no mistake:
it will ultimately be more significant.
For just as it is important to
emerge from the control of other
nations, it is even more
important to build one's own nation.
So I believe that this moment is
just as promising for Ghana --
and for Africa -- as the moment when
my father came of age and
new nations were being born.
This is a new moment
of great promise.
Only this time, we've learned
that it will not be giants like
Nkrumah and Kenyatta who will
determine Africa's future.
Instead, it will be you --
the men and women in Ghana's
Parliament, the
people you represent.
It will be the young people --
brimming with talent and energy
and hope -- who can claim the
future that so many in previous
generations never realized.
Now, to realize that promise,
we must first recognize a
fundamental truth that you
have given life to in Ghana:
development depends
on good governance.
(cheering)
That is the ingredient which has
been missing in far too many
places, for far too long.
That's the change that can
unlock Africa's potential.
And that is a responsibility
that can only be met by Africans.
As for America and the West, our
commitment must be measured by
more than just the
dollars we spend.
I've pledged substantial
increases in our foreign
assistance, which is in
Africa's interest and America's interests.
But the true sign of success is
not whether we are a source of
perpetual aid that helps
people scrape by --
it's whether we are partners
in building the capacity for
transformational change.
(cheering and applause)
This mutual responsibility
must be the foundation of our partnership.
And today, I will focus on four
areas that are critical to the
future of Africa and the entire
developing world: democracy;
opportunity; health; and the
peaceful resolution of conflict.
First, we must support strong
and sustainable democratic governments.
(cheering and applause)
As I said in Cairo, each nation
gives life to democracy in its
own way, and in line
with its own traditions.
But history offers
a clear verdict:
governments that respect the
will of their own people that
govern by consent and
not coercion are more prosperous,
they are more stable, and more
successful than governments that do not.
This is about more than
just holding elections --
it's also about what
happens between elections.
(cheering)
You know, repression
can take many forms,
and too many nations --
even those that have elections --
are plagued by problems that
condemn their people to poverty.
Now, no country is going to
create wealth if its leaders
exploit the economy to
enrich themselves --
(cheering and applause)
-- or if police can be bought
off by drug traffickers.
No business wants to invest in a
place where the government skims
20% off the top --
(cheering and applause)
-- or the head of the
Port Authority is corrupt.
No person wants to live in a
society where the rule of law
gives way to the rule of
brutality and bribery.
(cheering)
That is not democracy,
that is tyranny,
even if occasionally you
sprinkle an election in there.
And now is the time for that
style of governance to end.
In the 21st century, capable,
reliable and transparent
institutions are the
key to success --
strong parliaments, honest
police forces, independent judges --
(cheering)
-- an independent press;
a vibrant private sector, a civil
society; those are the things
that give life to democracy,
because that is what matters
in peoples' everyday lives.
Now, time and again,
Ghanaians have chosen Constitutional rule
over autocracy, and shown a
democratic spirit that allows
the energy of your
people to break through.
(cheering)
We see that in leaders who
accept defeat graciously --
the fact that President Mills'
opponents were standing beside
him last night to greet me
when I came off the plane spoke
volumes about Ghana.
(applause)
Victors who resist calls
to wield power against the
opposition in unfair ways.
We see that spirit in
courageous journalists like
Anas Aremeyaw Anas,
who risked his life to report the truth.
We see it in police
like Patience Quaye,
who helped prosecute the first
human trafficker in Ghana.
We see it in the young people
who are speaking up against
patronage, and participating
in the political process.
Across Africa, we've seen
countless examples of people
taking control of their destiny,
and making change from the
bottom up.
We saw it in Kenya, where civil
society and business came
together to help stop
post-election violence.
We saw it in South Africa, where
over three quarters of the
country voted in the
recent election --
the fourth since the
end of Apartheid.
We saw it in Zimbabwe, where the
Election Support Network braved
brutal repression to stand
up for the principle that a
person's vote is
their sacred right.
Now, make no mistake: history
is on the side of these brave
Africans; not with those who use
coups or change Constitutions to
stay in power.
(cheering and applause)
Africa doesn't need strongmen,
it needs strong institutions.
(cheering)
Now, America will not seek to
impose any system of government
on any other nation.
The essential truth of democracy
is that each nation determines
its own destiny.
But what America will do,
is increase assistance for
responsible individuals and
responsible institutions with a
focus on supporting
good governance --
on parliaments,
which check abuses of power and ensure that
opposition voices are
heard; on the rule of law,
which ensures the equal administration of justice;
on civic participation, so
that young people get involved;
and on concrete solutions
to corruption like forensic
accounting and
automating services,
strengthening hotlines,
protecting whistle-blowers to
advance transparency
and accountability.
And we provide this support, I
have directed my Administration
to give greater attention to
corruption in our Human Rights reports.
People everywhere should have
the right to start a business or
get an education
without paying a bribe.
(cheering)
We have a responsibility
to support those who act
responsibly and to
isolate those who don't,
and that is exactly
what America will do.
Now, this leads directly to our
second area of partnership --
supporting development that
provides opportunity for more people.
With better governance, I have
no doubt that Africa holds the
promise of a broader
base of prosperity.
Witness the extraordinary success
of Africans in my
country, American.
They're doing very well.
So they've got the talent,
they've got the entrepreneurial
spirit; the question is, how
do we make sure that they're
succeeding here in
their home countries?
The continent is rich
in natural resources.
And from cell phone
entrepreneurs to small farmers,
Africans have shown the capacity
and commitment to create their
own opportunities.
But old habits must
also be broken.
Dependence on commodities
-- or a single export --
has a tendency to concentrate
wealth in the hands of the few,
and leaves people too
vulnerable to downturns.
So in Ghana, for instance, oil
brings great opportunities,
and you have been very
responsible in preparing for new revenue.
But as so many Ghanaians know,
oil cannot simply become the new cocoa.
From South Korea to Singapore,
history shows that countries
thrive when they invest in
their people and in their
infrastructure; when --
(cheering and applause)
-- when they promote
multiple export industries,
develop a skilled workforce,
and create space for small and
medium-sized businesses
that create jobs.
As Africans reach
for this promise,
America will be more responsible
in extending our hand.
By cutting costs that go
to Western consultants and
administration, we want to put
more resources in the hands of
those who need it, while
training people to do more for themselves.
(applause)
That's why our $3.5 billion food
security initiative is focused
on new methods and
technologies for farmers --
not simply sending American
producers or goods to Africa.
Now, aid is not
an end in itself.
The purpose of foreign
assistance must be creating the
conditions where it's
no longer needed.
I want to see Ghanaians not
only self-sufficient in food,
I want to see you exporting food to
other countries and earning money.
You can do that.
(applause)
Now, America can also do more
to promote trade and investment.
Wealthy nations must open our
doors to goods and services from
Africa in a meaningful way.
That will be a commitment
of my administration.
And where there is
good governance,
we can broaden prosperity
through public-private
partnerships that invest in
better roads and electricity;
capacity-building that trains
people to grow a business;
financial services that
reach not just the cities,
but also the poor
and rural areas.
This is also in our
own interests --
for if people are lifted out of
poverty and wealth is created in
Africa, guess what?
New markets will open
up for our own goods.
So it's good for both.
Now, one area that holds out
both undeniable peril and
extraordinary promise is energy.
Africa gives off less greenhouse
gas than any other part of the
world, but it is the most
threatened by climate change.
A warming planet will spread
disease, shrink water resources,
and deplete crops, creating
conditions that produce more
famine and more conflict.
All of us -- particularly
the developed world --
have a responsibility
to slow these trends --
through mitigation, and by
changing the way that we use energy.
But we can also work with
Africans to turn this crisis
into opportunity.
Together, we can partner on
behalf of our planet and on
prosperity, and help countries
increase access to power while
skipping -- leapfrogging -- the
dirtier phase of development.
Think about it: Across Africa,
there is bountiful wind and
solar power; geothermal
energy and bio-fuels.
From the Rift Valley to
the North African deserts;
from the Western coasts to
South Africa's crops --
Africa's boundless natural gifts
can generate its own power,
while exporting profitable,
clean energy abroad.
These steps are about more than
growth numbers on a balance sheet.
They're about whether a young
person with an education can get
a job that supports a family; a
farmer can transfer their goods
to market; an entrepreneur
with a good idea can start a business.
It's about the dignity of work.
It's about the opportunity that
must exist for Africans in the
21st century.
Now, just as governance
is vital to opportunity,
it's also critical to the third
area I want to talk about --
strengthening public health.
In recent years, enormous
progress has been made in parts
of Africa.
Far more people are living
productively with HIV/AIDS,
and getting the drugs they need.
I just saw a wonderful clinic
and hospital that is focused
particularly on maternal health.
But too many still die from
diseases that shouldn't kill them.
When children are being killed
because of a mosquito bite,
and mothers are
dying in childbirth,
then we know that more
progress must be made.
Yet because of incentives
often provided by donor nations,
many African doctors
and nurses go overseas,
or work for programs that
focus on a single disease.
And this create gaps in primary
care and basic prevention.
Meanwhile, individual Africans
also have to make responsible
choices that prevent
the spread of disease,
while promoting public health in
their communities and countries.
So Across Africa,
we see examples of people tackling
these problems.
In Nigeria, an Interfaith effort
of Christians and Muslims has
set an example of cooperation
to confront malaria.
Here in Ghana and across Africa,
we see innovative ideas for
filling gaps in
care -- for instance,
through E-Health initiatives that
allow doctors in big cities
to support those in small towns.
America will support these
efforts through a comprehensive,
global health strategy.
Because in the 21st century,
we are called to act by our
conscience, but also
by our common interest.
Because when a child dies of a
preventable disease in Accra,
that diminishes us everywhere.
And when disease goes unchecked
in any corner of the world,
we know that it can spread
across oceans and continents.
And that's why my Administration
has committed $63 billion to
meet these challenges.
$63 billion.
(applause)
Building on the strong
efforts of President Bush,
we will carry forward the
fight against HIV/AIDS.
We will pursue the goal of
ending deaths from malaria and
tuberculosis, and we will
work to eradicate polio.
(applause)
We will fight neglected
tropical disease.
And we won't confront
illnesses in isolation --
we will invest in public health
systems that promote wellness,
and focus on the health
of mothers and children.
(applause)
Now, as we partner on behalf
of a healthier future,
we must also stop the
destruction that comes not from
illness, but from
human beings --
and so the final area that
I will address is conflict.
Let me be clear: Africa is
not the crude caricature of a
continent at perpetual war.
But, if we are honest,
for far too many Africans,
conflict is a part of life,
as constant as the sun.
There are wars over land
and wars over resources.
And it's still far too easy for
those without conscience to
manipulate whole communities
into fighting among faiths and tribes.
These conflicts are a millstone
around Africa's neck.
Now, we all have
many identities --
of tribe and ethnicity; of
religion and nationality.
But defining oneself in
opposition to someone who
belongs to a different tribe,
or who worships a different
prophet, has no place
in the 21st century.
(cheering and applause)
Africa's diversity should
be a source of strength,
not a cause for division.
We are all God's children.
We all share common
aspirations --
to live in peace and security;
to access education and
opportunity; to love our
families, and our communities,
and our faith.
That is our common humanity.
That is why we must stand up
to inhumanity in our midst.
It is never justified --
never justifiable to target innocents
in the name of ideology.
It is the death sentence of a
society to force children to
kill in wars.
It is the ultimate mark of
criminality and cowardice to
condemn women to relentless
and systematic rape.
We must bear witness to the
value of every child in Darfur
and the dignity of every
woman in the Congo.
No faith or culture should
condone the outrages against them.
And all of us must strive for
the peace and security necessary
for progress.
Africans are standing
up for this future.
Here, too, in Ghana we are
seeing you help point the way forward.
Ghanaians should take pride
in your contributions to
peacekeeping from Congo
to Liberia to Lebanon --
(applause)
-- and your efforts to resist
the scourge of the drug trade.
(cheering and applause)
We welcome the steps that are
being taken by organizations
like the African Union and
ECOWAS to better resolve
conflicts to keep the peace,
and support those in need.
And we encourage the
vision of a strong,
regional security architecture
that can bring effective,
transnational forces
to bear when needed.
America has a responsibility
to work with you as a partner to
advance this vision,
not just with words,
but with support that
strengthens African capacity.
When there's a genocide in
Darfur or terrorists in Somalia,
these are not simply
African problems --
they are global
security challenges,
and they demand a
global response.
And that's why we stand ready
to partner through diplomacy
and technical assistance,
and logistical support,
and we will stand behind
efforts to hold war criminals accountable.
And let me be clear: our Africa
Command is focused not on
establishing a foothold
in the continent,
but on confronting these common
challenges to advance the
security of America,
Africa and the world.
(cheering and applause)
In Moscow, I spoke of the need
for an international system
where the universal rights of
human beings are respected,
and violations of those
rights are opposed.
And that must include a
commitment to support those who
resolve conflicts peacefully,
to sanction and stop those who
don't, and to help
those who have suffered.
But ultimately, it will be
vibrant democracies like
Botswana and Ghana which roll
back the causes of conflict,
and advance the frontiers
of peace and prosperity.
As I said earlier, Africa's
future is up to Africans.
The people of Africa are
ready to claim that future.
And in my country,
African-Americans --
including so many
recent immigrants --
have thrived in every
sector of society.
We've done so despite
a difficult past,
and we've drawn strength
from our African heritage.
With strong institutions
and a strong will,
I know that Africans can live
their dreams in Nairobi and
Lagos; Kigali and Kinshasa;
Harare and right here in Accra.
(cheering and applause)
You know, 52 years ago, the
eyes of the world were on Ghana.
And a young preacher named
Martin Luther King traveled
here, to Accra, to watch the
Union Jack come down and the
Ghanaian flag go up.
This was before the march on
Washington or the success of the
civil rights movement
in my country.
And Dr. King was asked
how he felt while watching the birth of
a nation.
And he said: "It renews my
conviction in the ultimate
triumph of justice."
Now, that triumph
must be won once more,
and it must be won by you.
(cheering and applause)
And I am particularly speaking
to the young people all across
Africa and right here in Ghana.
In places like Ghana,
young people make up over half of the population.
And here is what you must know:
the world will be what you make of it.
You have the power to hold
your leaders accountable,
and to build institutions
that serve the people.
You can serve in
your communities,
and harness your energy and
education to create new wealth
and build new
connections to the world.
You can conquer disease,
and end conflicts,
and make change
from the bottom up.
You can do that.
Yes you can.
(cheering)
Because in this moment,
history is on the move.
But these things can only
be done if all of you take
responsibility for your future.
And it won't be easy.
It will take time and effort.
There will be
suffering and setbacks.
But I can promise you this:
America will be with you every
step of a way.
As a partner.
As a friend.
(cheering and applause)
Opportunity won't come from
any other place, though --
it must come from the decisions
that all of you make,
the things that you do, the hope
that you hold in your heart.
Ghana, freedom is
your inheritance.
Now, it is your responsibility
to build upon freedom's foundation.
And if you do, we will look back
years from now to places like
Accra and say, this was the time
when the promise was realized --
this was the moment when
prosperity was forged;
when pain was overcome; and
a new era of progress began.
This can be the time when we
witness the triumph of justice once more.
Yes we can.
Thank you very much.
God bless you.
Thank you.
(cheering and applause)